## Michael Winter
### Introduction

In using the CRIM tools for a repertory for which it was not specifically intended to analyze, there have inevitably been some challenges and learning opportunities. When using the CRIM tools, we are often examining presentation types (see Schubert 2007) and any kind of relationships between works. However, in the Eton Choirbook (GB-WRec MS 178; hereafter Eton) repertory, there is an absence of pervasive imitation or fuga, and there is not the same tradition of borrowing across different works. Nevertheless, the CRIM tools are still extremely valuable for the study of the Eton repertory, and there is significant potential. This paper will explore how the CRIM tools can be utilized in the ‘Estimation phase’ of my work to study the repertory from Eton and how we might be able to confirm, inform, or challenge scholarly perceptions on an ‘Eton Style’. It will also explore how these tools can be used to inform approaches to the study and reconstruction of fragmentary material from Eton and how the editor might justify, rationalize, or explain their decision-making; we will measure the possible against the probable, and thus bring us closer to the range of choices available to a given composer, and therefore inform our own interventions.

### The Eton Choirbook
The Eton Choirbook is perhaps the most significant source of pre-Reformation English polyphony. It is relatively well preserved for a manuscript of its age, and it has no rival in terms of scale, splendor, and musical significance. Despite the loss of about half the original gatherings, and about a third of the pieces, the Eton Choirbook is the only substantial source of this incredibly virtuosic melismatic music from fifteenth-century England.

The manuscript was copied between 1500-1504, for use at Eton College (Williamson 1997: 15). Uniquely for a manuscript of this era, it is intricately linked to the institution which gives it its name. There are nine compositions by Robert Wylkynson, the college’s informator choristarum between 1500-1515, as well as numerous works by former scholars of Eton. The College was founded in 1440 by King Henry VI, initially as an ecclesiastical college and would later become twinned with King’s College, Cambridge (also founded by Henry VI) to allow for the progression of scholars from Eton to King’s, and of choristers from King’s College to Eton. With this transfer of students and musicians, there was also a great transfer of musical materials. An inventory from King’s College in 1529 lists numerous ‘bokys off parcemente’ that contain concordant works found in the Eton Choirbook. There are also works by composers not known to have had any formal connection to the twin institutions such as William Horwood, Gilbert Banaster, and a now lost work attributed to John Dunstaple (the only five-voice work ascribed to this composer).

Despite the loss of so much of the original repertory, this manuscript gives an extremely valuable impression of around fifty years of English choral music (1450-1500); a period from which comparatively little survives.

### CRIM and Eton
At first sound and sight, it appears that there are considerable differences between the music of the Eton Choirbook and that studied by CRIM. The Eton music is highly florid, there is little use of imitation or fuga, a broader vocal compass is utilized, and there is a greater interplay of vocal forces and textures. Overall, this has not caused problems for the CRIM tools themselves, but rather the way in which the tools can be used to examine the Eton repertory. Tools that have been developed to highlight one aspect of the CRIM repertory, can be used differently, and tools searching for compositional features which are not as prevalent in the Eton corpus requires the careful adjustment of settings to ensure that the number of false positives and false negatives is reduced. The most significant challenge that has been presented is how to approach places in which voice parts are split (known as ‘gymels’) for extended sections or for final chords of cadences. In the first case, this is also tied into considerations of how we transcribe the music. Music21 (on which CRIM Intervals is based) can deal with harmonic intervals on one staff, but CRIM Intervals only recognizes one note for each voice-part at a time.

Additionally, whereas the primary focus of CRIM is to look for similarity and difference between works (and in particular Mass settings), there is little borrowing of material between different polyphonic compositions in Eton. That is not to say that there is none; the Magnificat settings of Horwood and Nesbett share some similarities, and Fayrfax’s Mass O Bone Jesu (though not found in Eton) is based on an antiphon of the same name (regrettably only the mean part survives). The CRIM Project considers where borrowing leaves off and stylistic similarity starts and in the Eton repertory, while there might be the absence of obvious quotation, there are certainly stylistic norms and similarities across the repertory (See Fitch 2008, and idem. 2009).

From what survives in Eton and this period of English music in general, there does not seem to be the same tradition of borrowing between polyphonic constructions compared to continental practices. In analyzing the Eton repertory using CRIM Intervals, I have not been searching for compositional similarities between pieces, in part due to the lack of editions of sufficient quality in a format that can be read by CRIM Intervals. This paucity of digital editions is something I hope to reduce through the completion my of PhD.

In search of an ‘Eton Style’: What CRIM can teach us about Eton
Despite its aural and visual beauty, and the rich recording history of its repertory, there is a lack in scholarship of any extensive study of an ‘Eton Style’. Fabrice Fitch (2009: 37) attributes this lacuna, in part, to the difficulty in charting the development of polyphony in England in the mid-fifteenth century owing to the scarcity of polyphonic sources from this period. Indeed, there is a stylistic chasm in what survives between the music of John Dunstaple (d. 1453) and the Eton repertory (c. 1470-1500). Fitch (2009: 38) further laments the difficulty in attempting to place the music of Eton within broader English practice. Even the works by the earliest composers in Eton such as William Horwood (d. 1484) and Gilbert Banaster (d. 1487) seem to have far more in common with the younger generation of composers in Eton than John Dunstaple (d. 1453), John Plummer (c. 1410 – 1483), or Walter Frye (d. c.1474). Rather than presenting a cross-section of polyphony at the start of the fifteenth-century, it is more likely that Eton offers a ‘slice’ of one institution at a particular time (Williamson 1997: 192) which also represents the very finest music of that institution and quite possibly of the country at the end of the fifteenth century.

This section will explore ways in which the tools developed for CRIM can be used to search for stylistic features of the Eton repertory. The absence of digital files of sufficient quality to be used with the CRIM tools has limited the scope of this study and therefore this section does not claim to have fully developed conclusions. The pieces from Eton used in this study can be found after the bibliography.

William Horwood’s Salve Regina is likely the oldest work in Eton, and it was probably the first to be copied (Williamson 2010: 28). As such, it is a useful work to examine in trying to bridge the gap between the music of the mid-fifteenth century and the rest of the Eton repertory. CRIM Intervals can be used to support assertions and observations made by other scholars on this work. Hugh Benham has noted the equal range used in the lowest two voices; an ‘old-fashioned’ feature more redolent of the five-voice works in the Old Hall Manuscript (GB-Lbl Add. MS 57950) than in the rest of the Eton repertory (Benham 1977: 75). Similarly, Roger Bowers (1995) has described these changes in performing forces as a ‘performance revolution’. 

Figure 1a has used the first CRIM notebook to count and plot the pitches used by each voice-part, therefore creating a ‘note count’ graph. This graph produced by the CRIM tools clearly illustrates the overlap of the lowest two-voices that Benham describes, not just as having identical ranges, but also having the same peak notes in their respective ranges.


Figure 1a: Note count graph for William Horwood, Salve Regina